---
layout: post
title:  "Rhubarb tang"
date:   2020-06-04 11:00:00 +0100
categories: recipes
---
If you are following the blog, you have been busy learning about memory models.  We started from the [basics][mmp1]: what are memory models? What's interesting and challenging about them?
Then covered [weak memory][mmp2] and got to the point of introducing the concept of [happens-before relation][mmhb].  With that, we [visited a real-world memory model specification][mmgo], that of the Go programming language.

Pat yourself on the back.  Great job!  It is time to take a refreshing break.
In my [welcome post][fizz], I said I would share some (drink) recipes.  Here is one for the summer.  I call it "rhubarb tang".

We'll use:

- Orange juice
- Apple juice (optional)
- Rhubarb
- Sugar
- Tequila
- Ice

This recipe yields a drink and a dessert.  Two for the price of one.

Roasted sweetened rhubarb makes for a nice dessert.  We'll use the liquid that remains to make a tangy drink.  Here we go:

1. Cut the rhubarb in about 3cm length (about 1 inch).
2. Place the rhubarb in an oven pan.
3. Add the juice so as to cover the bottom of the pan.
4. Top the rhubarb with lots of sugar.  Be generous.
5. Put it in the oven for about 20 minutes at around 200C (390 F).

Once out of the oven and cooled, you can eat the rhubarb for dessert---possibly adding a bit more sugar.
We will use the liquid that remained at the bottom of the oven pan to make a drink:

1. Pour the sweetened juicy rhubarb liquid into a glass.
2. Add a splash of water (sparking water is even better).
3. Add one shot of tequila.
4. Top it with lots of ice.

You get extra credit if the rhubarb comes from your home garden.

Enjoy!


[fizz]: /recipes/2020/03/04/starting-with-fizz.html
[mmp1]: /programming-languages/2020/03/05/memory-models.html
[mmp2]: /programming-languages/2020/03/06/weak-memory-models.html
[mmhb]: /programming-languages/2020/03/11/mm-hb.html
[mmgo]: /programming-languages/2020/03/12/gomm.html
