---
title:  "What I think about when I think about music"
categories: music
date:   2025-05-17 10:00:00 +0100
author: Daniel Fava and ChatGPT
---

Recently I started to learn the piano on my own.
With an app installed on my phone, I began to learn from the very beginning.
Eventually I bumped into questions about music theory, so I incorporated ChatGPT and YouTube as learning partners.


I figured that being inspired by music in general would keep my motivation,
so I started reading a book,
:book: [Absolutely on music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Absolutely_on_Music),
that is a conversation between the author and an orchestra conductor.
One interesting thing about the book is that you can listen to the pieces they are talking.


This opened a fantastic door for me, which I continue to explore with the help of ChatGPT even after finishing the book.
Here is a collection of conversations with ChatGPT that I've found interesting.

The first is a conversation about the end of the romantic period, the industrial revolution, postmodernism, and the contemporary classical music: [Postmodernism, the industrial revolution, and contemporary classical music](/music/postmodernism.html).

This one is part of a conversation about Mahler where ChatGPT called a piece of music philosophical, and we explored what that meant:
[Mahler and what it means for music to be philosophical](/music/marhler_philosophical_music.html).

One about [Brahms as a continuation of Beethoven](/music/brahsm_and_beethoven.html).

This one is about something called _period music_, which means trying to mimic the instruments of the time that the music was composed.  Music played with period instruments sounds subtlety different: [Period music and listening to subtleties](/music/period_music.html).

A short conversation about a niche type of music called [twelve tone music](/music/twelve_tone.html), where all notes are used.

A short conversation on [Stravinsky's _Le Sacre du Printemps_ and his arrest](/music/stravinsky.html).

